Hello, everybody,
and welcome to session 302,
Introduction to Xcode.
I hope that was the glitch
for the evening with the bad
batteries in the clicker.
That's me.
And, all right.
We have a full packed program,
and we'll be going a little bit
more in depth from what you've
seen yesterday in session 300.
Let's talk about what does it
take today to be a modern IDE.
First of all,
you have to have a streamlined workflow.
These days, your projects are huge.
You have tons of resources,
many hundreds, thousands of source files,
et cetera.
And you need to be able to focus
really quickly on what it is
that you're working on right now,
and be able to manage and navigate
all those files really efficiently.
You also need a powerful editor.
That goes without saying.
You have to be able to go
through your long files,
find your methods,
navigate through all that source code,
maybe group files together,
which you're working on,
just having a small working set.
You need a fast and
flexible build system.
Fast goes without saying,
because your product is so big.
But it also has to be flexible.
You have to be able to customize it,
what to do with a C++ file,
what to do with a Nib file, etc.
So you need to be able to
make it just right for you.
You need to have quick
documentation access.
OS X is really powerful.
It has really powerful APIs,
Cocoa and Carbon.
All together they have numerous
thousands of API calls,
and you have to have an access to
documentation of those API calls
really in an efficient way.
And it should be integrated
with the UI and profiling tools.
Code that you're writing
is just part of the story,
right?
You're also doing the
user interface design.
Maybe it's not you
who's doing the design,
maybe there's somebody else doing it,
but you better integrate,
so when you add in your resource file,
it gets reflected in your IDE.
Then profiling, you wrote your app,
it's finally working, it's not crashing,
but it's kind of slow,
so you need to profile.
It would be good if the
profiling tools knew about the
source code and vice versa.
So finally, source control management.
Chances are that if you're
writing a large application,
you need to write it on your own.
So there's a large team of you,
maybe there's a dozen,
maybe there's a hundred of people,
and you need to integrate with
different people together through
the source control management.
And the last-- I don't think
the batteries are quite there.
The last thing that you need is
API awareness in the debugger.
Source-level debugging
goes without saying,
but it will be really nice
if you had direct display of
your own personal data types,
as well, in the debugger.
So now let's have a quick look at Xcode.
Here we can see we do have
a streamlined workflow.
As Steve Naroff showed yesterday, in 300,
you have really quick access to all
of your data and all of your files.
You do have a powerful editor.
It features code completion.
Today,
we will show you how it really works.
You have access to your methods,
to individual methods,
to files by groups, etc.,
You do have a fast and
flexible build system.
Today,
we will not go quite in-depth on that.
There's session 303 in
24 hours right here,
so you can see more
detail about that there.
You have quick access to documentation.
Apple's previous tools were
actually pretty good at
integrating the documentation,
but we have made it much,
much more efficient even
than what we had so far.
We're now using the
Safari rendering engine,
as you saw maybe in the previous session,
and that makes rendering
of documentation much,
much faster and prettier.
And it is integrated with
UI and profiling tools.
We will see some demos
of that later today.
It is integrated with
source control management.
Xcode features integration with CVS,
and also with Perforce.
This screenshot is not necessarily
the most indicative of that.
And we do have API awareness
in the debugger.
Again,
main is not the best place to show.
But it gets even better.
These were the of courses.
Speed is really important.
So we have taken great care of
improving many little things
which add up to a big picture.
First, we added Zero Link,
which basically eliminates the
need for linking altogether
during the development cycle.
We have added Fix and Continue,
which eliminates the need
to stop and relaunch your
application while debugging.
We have an annotated source editor,
so that any compiler errors
or warnings are visible right
in the editor as you're there.
You don't need to have an extra
panel pop up and click between
windows if you choose not to do that.
We have CodeSense,
which is our way of code completion,
but it's actually more than that,
and more on that later.
We have parallel and distributed builds.
You saw a demo of that yesterday,
using all those beautiful
Xsers over there.
It works even without Xsers.
It works with just your
neighbor's computer,
or when you're at home
with your wife's computer.
We do have predictive compilation that
kicks off the compiler in the background,
while you're still typing.
and...
So when you add it all together,
it actually adds up to
something that's really,
really fast.
All of those little things put
together are something very fast.
So let's have a closer
look at all those things.
This was just very superficial.
Now the project window,
as you saw before,
on the left side you have
an outline view of groups.
You have static and dynamic groups.
Static groups you create
the way you want them to be.
And dynamic groups-- we also call them
sometimes smart groups-- are generated
and maintained for you by Xcode.
You can have files filtered
or kept together by type,
by file name.
You also have smart
groups for find results,
for errors, et cetera.
You can do searching and
filtering on any of those groups.
So you can search on
special variable name,
and then you can filter just
in which files you want to
look at them furthermore.
This is very important
when you do a batch find,
or maybe even a batch replace,
and you find yourself
in a lot of trouble.
You need to narrow down the search.
You have an optional integrated editor.
You can use the main project
window for text editing as well.
So that eliminates the need
for having many windows,
which is especially helpful
when using a 12-inch PowerBook,
for instance.
And you have inspectors
with search fields.
We'll see more of that in the demo,
but it allows you to search
and find compiler settings,
for instance, very quickly.
The Xcode editor is the
other very important,
it's the key part where you're
probably going to spend the most time,
because you're writing source.
It allows you to apply sources to
the application which is running,
as it is running from within the editor.
You don't even have to
open the debugger window.
You can do it right away from the editor.
It features CodeSense.
Again, that's code completion and more.
The errors are shown in source code,
and we'll see that in the demo.
You have quick access to
documentation through command clicks,
option clicks, and through other means.
And you, of course,
do have customizable key bindings.
You can set up your own key bindings.
You can set up, we have pre-canned Emacs,
CodeWarrior, MPW, and other key bindings.
Now CodeSense,
I mentioned it a few times before.
Xcode stays completely
aware of your source code.
It parses your code in the background,
and as you make changes to it,
it knows what you're doing.
So it offers you code-sensitive,
context-sensitive code completion.
It also allows you to do class browsing.
Yesterday in a demo,
you saw briefly search on symbols.
You can search just on definitions,
on many other things.
And we'll see that
later today in the demo.
And there's going to be more coming
based on this technology of CodeSense
in a future release of CodeSense.
What's important about it is
it works for code in progress.
It doesn't have to be compiled.
So as you're typing new code,
and even if it has bugs in it,
like you forgot some
curly brace somewhere,
it will still work.
And that's very powerful.
Yet it uses the same parser,
or very close to the same
parser as the compiler.
So it's taking the same
path as your compiled code,
which is also very important
when you do if-defs.
Works for C, C++, Objective-C,
and Objective-C++.
And we will be adding Java support
for that in Panther GM.
Now the inspectors.
In Xcode,
we have added a new set of inspectors
with a consistent user interface,
very simple interface.
It allows you to inspect
target dependencies.
To set compiler options
on a clear text way,
which is very user-friendly,
and to view documentation for your
compiler settings and linker settings,
etc.
It allows you to set up the build rules,
as I said, those are the rules,
what to do with a C file,
what to do with a Nib file, etc.
You can add your own rules,
you can change the rules that we ship.
Project settings,
which are more global settings,
like where to build,
where to put the intermediate stuff.
CodeSense settings, which is Inspector,
which needs to be properly applied
when you actually want to use it.
And source code settings,
that would be indentation, tab stops,
filing codings, or using UTF-8,
or using just plain Mac OS Roman.
And I talked a lot,
I would like to invite Matt Firlik,
senior engineer on the Xcode team,
and he's going to show
us the workflow in Xcode.
So Matt, what do you have for us?
Thank you, Stan.
We haven't done anything yet, so hold on.
So we're going to talk about
some of the workflow issues.
One of the complex parts about
workflow is that we all spend a great
deal of time with workflow every day.
We move between files, debugging,
documentation, a whole gamut of things.
But the complexity comes in that we all
do it just a little bit differently.
Some people like their
windows in certain places,
certain sizes, certain keystrokes.
The important thing to note about Xcode
is that instead of trying to provide a
single idiomatic approach to workflow,
instead we take the approach of
providing flexible and customizable
options for navigation and
organization of your projects,
so that it works as you expect it,
but works for everyone.
So let's take a look at it.
We're going to take a look
at a Carbon example today,
one that actually ships on the system.
It's called ClockView.
[Transcript missing]
So it always shows you
an amalgam of that.
This becomes extremely useful,
as Stan mentioned before,
when we do something like find.
For example, if I was going to bring
up the Batch Find panel,
I can actually go ahead
and type in the string OS.
I want to find where this string exists
within every single file in my project.
Click on Find,
and it's going to go ahead and show
me that list in the detail group.
Same idea,
same metaphor that we used before,
but it's showing me find results.
And in this case,
the status shows me I have 218 selected.
What if I did that again, and looked for,
in this case, HIView.
I have 32 in this case.
If I go ahead and select
both of these together,
you can see that-- maybe
some of you can't see,
but it does really say 250 up there.
And if I go ahead and type in main.cp,
there is every instance of
those two strings in main.cp,
which makes it very useful and very
quick and easy to get at the content
you want by looking at things in groups.
We can also, as Stan said,
do the same thing for
your project symbols.
The information from this comes
from the persistent symbol index,
as Stan mentioned before.
And these are all the symbols that
is in this particular application.
The number up here says
a little under 11,000.
I can actually go through and look for
all of the methods that look for bounds.
And I can see all the
implementations of those.
Making it really quick and easy
to go and find the content you're
looking for to go straight to it.
So we've talked a little
bit about organization.
Let's talk about navigation.
How do I actually get to content?
How do I work with it?
This is one of those things
that starts to become a little
bit personal about editors.
Where does your editor go?
So in some cases, people like editors to
be all in one window.
So we have this button up here,
which allows you to pull up the embedded
editor and look at your content.
So I can go back to my sources,
taking out the little
item up here in my filter,
click on a file, and it shows up in line.
So I can go ahead and take a look
at my file using the built-in
functionality of the editor.
I can scroll down to something
that I want to create to edit.
Or I can use the function pop-up,
which lists all the functions
in this particular class,
and jump to something
that I want to work with.
As I select more and more files,
each file is put into
the particular view,
and I can go ahead and work on it.
But as you see,
it takes up a lot of screen.
And some people may want
a larger detail view.
So in some cases,
you may want to have an external editor.
So as one of the main idioms
in Xcode is double-clicking
brings up an external editor.
So I'll go ahead and
double-click on a file.
And there's my main.cp.
I can go ahead and actually
double-click on the rest of these.
And I can bring up external
editors for all of them,
which then brings up the
very important question,
how many windows is too many?
In this case, I have three open,
which starts to kind of
clutter my screen real estate.
So there's an actual nice
little customization here,
where in the upper right-hand
corner of the editor is something
called the editing mode.
For those of you who can see this icon,
it looks like there's three windows
paned one in front of the other.
If I go ahead and click that,
it becomes a single pane that now
every time I double-click on a file,
it's opened in that editor.
So it's always open in
one external editor,
giving you the ability to work
in the way you might like.
However,
once I have this external editor open,
I have to keep going back and
forth to get more and more files.
And it kind of destroys the
flexibility of having this
separate window to edit things.
So much as I said double-clicking on
something would open up a particular
file in the external editor,
I could actually
double-click on a folder.
In this case, it actually opens the
first item in that folder.
But I can go ahead and click--
I can go ahead and drag the groups
and see the groups on the left.
So now you can start thinking
of editors as collections of
things that you want to work on,
bringing up possibly more than one,
but still having the flexibility
to either click on the file or
just go ahead and drag into the
editor and go ahead and work on it.
This, of course,
works the same for the project,
where I can click there.
And now I have the entire contents
of my project in one external editor,
which then allows me to go
back and use a feature that we
affectionately call MetroMore,
which is to double-click
on these column headers.
And I can get some more workspace back.
So now I can start looking at more
and more windows without having to
resort to using expose or something
to see all the windows to give you
a little bit more functionality.
So once we've edited, or actually,
let me take that back.
Once we've gone to a particular file,
let's talk about things
that we would want to edit.
So I can go down and let's scroll down to
the bottom here of this particular class.
I have a method here, hi set visible.
Let's just say, for whatever sake,
as I was developing with this,
I didn't actually put that in.
And I knew that I needed
to put something here.
If I weren't familiar
with some of the APIs,
or I needed more information,
what I would like to do is use some
of the other assets that Xcode has
to provide this information for me.
One way of doing that is to
go to the documentation window
which provides me a list of all
the information that I can look
at based on a particular topic,
like Carbon,
so I can scroll down through the topics.
Or I could actually use the
nice little API search to go
ahead and type in something,
like hiviewset, find the function I want,
click on it, and see the documentation.
Very quick way to get to
information about things that
you use or you want to use.
However, in some cases,
going to the documentation might take
a little bit of time if you're not
sure exactly what you might need.
This is where some things
like CodeSense comes in mind.
You might want to go back to the Symbol
Smart Group and do some filtering
looking for a particular method.
You might also want to bring up
the class browser that we ship
that also has the same information
showing you the hierarchy of
the information in your classes.
I can go through and click
on a particular method,
actually see the definitions,
go ahead and look at those and use one
of those in my particular implementation,
which is great for reference information.
But when you're in the
midst of developing code,
what you really want is you want
that information at your fingertips.
You figure Xcode already knows about it.
I'm not really sure what I want yet,
but why can't you just give it to me?
Well, as Stan has pointed out,
we actually have.
So what we do is provide as one of the
features of CodeSense is code completion.
It's the ability to figure out
contextually where you are with some
information about potentially what
you want to give you that information.
So I'm just going to start typing here.
I'm going to type hi,
and I'm going to go ahead
and hit the completion key.
What it's going to do is it's
actually going to go ahead
and take that information,
take that prefix,
take contextually where I am,
and go and try and figure
out what it should provide.
In this case,
it went back and pulled out all the
list of functions that start with hi.
Actually,
let me go ahead and move my window
over here a little bit so that I can
show this to you a little more easily.
You'll see that there's a
nice little scroller here.
I can actually scroll through this
extremely long list of elements,
which gets me closer to what I want.
But I'm looking for more information.
So I could actually just
go ahead and keep typing.
I could actually just type hiview.
And you'll see that the list actually
starts to filter itself down.
I can back up and type a.
And see in this case,
there are only four elements that match.
I could type b and c some more.
But in this case,
what I'm really looking for is--
and Dan Brunner, and Dan Lebowitz,
are the founders of the
Google Cloud Platform.
The first step is to
create a new application,
and the second step is to
create a new application.
and use code completion.
Very,
very quick and easy to go and get the
information you want right in line.
So, there are a number of--
Thank you.
It's important to note that there
are a number of preferences and
configurations to a number of
functionality pieces within Xcode.
Typically,
to go ahead and edit some of those,
you would go to the Preferences
and pull up the Preferences panel.
In this case, for the code completion,
Code Sense, they're all under the
Navigation Preferences,
and you could set it up so
that it automatically pops up
when you dereference a pointer,
when you type a period,
and also filter if it's case sensitive
when it brings up information.
You can also go to the
Preferences and set key bindings,
an extremely useful feature for
mapping your keyboard to exactly
the functionality you want.
In some cases, with code completion,
people want escape.
Some people want F5.
Some people want different keystrokes.
And we give you the ability to take
code completion and all the other
functionalities and map them to the key
sets that you're most familiar with.
When you want to go and edit things that
aren't particular to the application
itself instead of key bindings,
you want to look at things
for information on files,
I can actually navigate to a
file and bring up the inspector.
In most cases,
when you want to edit something,
the Inspector is where
you're going to go.
And the Inspector is a
context-sensitive way of looking at
different aspects of your project.
In this case, I'm looking at the general
information for the main.cp file.
But I should actually go ahead
and click up on the project.
And now I'm looking at the
information on the project,
build styles and other aspects.
So when you want to go
ahead and edit information,
you're going to do so
with the Inspectors.
So that's just a quick overview
of some of the workflow aspects.
You'll see more about the Inspectors
with the compiling and debugging in
later sessions in this demonstration.
Thank you.
Thanks Matt for the very good demo.
Now, let's move on.
There's way more to come.
Okay,
so now I've written your source code.
It's all beautifully completed.
You read the documentation on
exactly what the app will be doing.
Now we need to build it.
We need the build system for that.
Xcode has a fully integrated
build system that's into the IDE.
What does it mean?
Well, it's not using or relying on
external tools such as Make or
Jam or Ant or things like that.
It just knows the state of your project.
It knows which files you have touched,
which headers maybe you have touched.
So it has a fast dependency analysis.
It knows that when you change a header,
it needs to recompile also
this set of source files.
And that's immediately
reflected in the user interface.
You have an up-to-date status.
You have also error annotation,
which was mentioned before,
but it's also shown in the main project
window when there's a new project.
There's a compiler error or warning.
And you have an optional access
to see all the gory details.
That is usually hidden away from you.
But if you need to,
if you're really debugging a bizarre
error that it just says build
failed because of something that
you would expect would be working,
well, maybe it just ran out of space or
something even more cryptic happened.
So you can access those gory details.
The compiler under the hood
of Xcode is based on GCC 3.3.
We took it from the
open source community,
but then at Apple,
we have added a lot of special
enhancements to the compiler.
That compiler, from its own,
is very fast in generating code.
It also generates very efficient code,
so not only your compile time is fast,
but also what your
customers will care about,
the runtime of your application, is very,
very quick.
PCH, precompiled headers.
This is something that
actually GCC doesn't have.
We have added that.
That's an Apple add-on.
So that even the C++ people
who were complaining about the
lack of precompiled headers,
so far we now have something
that will suit everybody's needs.
And finally,
we have added support for inline assembly
exactly in the Code Warrior style.
So you can take your Code Warrior style
C file with embedded assembly
and compile it right away.
We have added many other switches
that are to handle progmas,
but it's in more detail than
is suitable for this session.
and the rest of the team.
We also have a new application
called Precompiled Headers.
This is something new
that we added to GCC 3.3.
It's a brand new mechanism
that works for all languages.
It works for C, C++, Objective-C,
and the Safari people with C++.
And there's going to be
more coming with Panther.
This is just a pre-release,
so the PCH mechanism,
you might find cases where
it's maybe not quite mature,
but we are working on more and
getting things more automated.
Now, predictive compilation,
that's another step to
cut down the compile time.
It primes the pump.
Most compiles are not,
they're also just syntax checks, right?
You're trying,
did I forget a curly brace somewhere?
But even when you're doing
turnaround debugging,
then you just go somewhere to the code,
you change something,
and even if you know exactly
it's this one character,
the time that it takes you to say,
command S to save and command B to build,
during that time, you know,
when you're really fast,
it's maybe half a second.
Well, during that time,
the compiler was already running,
and it's ahead of you.
So it cuts down the turnaround time.
So it starts the compiler as soon
as you start editing something,
and it goes through all
of your pounding clues,
and pre-processes, pre-compiles that.
And when you say,
actually save and build,
it will do just the rest,
which is usually 1% of the work.
Then comes the build,
something we demoed yesterday,
and this is really not the
most mainstream feature,
definitely not the most
mainstream feature yet.
This is something more for thrill
seekers at this very moment.
It takes care of,
it takes advantage of rendezvous.
It will discover other computers
on the net that have the
same Xcode version installed,
and it will try to distribute the
builds to that computer if the user
on that computer has allowed that.
It creates completely
self-contained jobs,
so even if you don't have the
same headers installed there,
or even if there's a
little bit of a mismatch,
you don't have to have a
mapped network file system,
for instance.
The compiled job is
completely self-contained.
And the pre-compiling
happens on your machine,
and then it gets passed
once to that server,
but it happens only once.
So if you compile more than one file,
you actually have a great speed benefit.
The greatest speed benefit
is around four machines.
It really varies on the kind
of code that you're using.
You don't really need that set of Xservs
unless you have a huge build production.
Like at Apple,
we have built an integration
where we built all of OS X.
And when you have large apps,
maybe like Maya,
having that would make sense.
What it requires is a
really fast network,
100 megabits or gigabit.
With 10 megabit or over airport,
you will not see any benefits.
So now I would like to
invite Anders Bertolud,
who's the lead Xcode engineer,
to show us a little bit
about the build system.
Thanks, Stan.
So Matt showed you some of the great
features we have for navigating
and for editing source code.
So I'm going to go ahead and
show you how to build it and some
of the workflow we have there.
So I'm going to open the
same project that Matt used.
This is the Carbon example ClockView.
And what I'm going to do is to
actually show the embedded editor here.
So I'll go ahead and open that.
And I'm going to select one of the
files here called the ClockView.cp.
And this is where a lot of the
code in this little program is.
So what I'm going to do now is just
to build and we'll see what happens.
Whoa, it had some errors.
Okay.
That wasn't expected.
So let's go and select the
errors and warnings group.
As you notice, on the left side,
there is now the errors and warnings
smart group that shows you any files
in your code that have problems
last time you compiled them.
In this case,
we see that there were a couple
of errors and some warnings.
Okay.
You'll also notice that there
is an icon in the margin here.
And in fact, if I go back up here,
you'll see both the warnings
and errors are shown here.
I can actually,
if I'm looking at just the source code,
let's say I'm working in this mode,
I can actually just click on this error
here and then it will show me what the
problem was up in the status field.
So what I'm going to do here is to
actually show you a third way as well.
We do have a warnings
and errors panel that,
as Stan mentioned,
you almost don't have to use.
This is only if there's something
really weird that's going on.
You can actually see exactly what
the build system was trying to do,
in this case,
trying to compile this file.
If you want the real details
of what was going on,
you can actually select entries
up here and it will go down
and show you the transcript,
including all the command lines.
But 97% of the time,
you don't need to see that.
So what we're going to do here is I'm
going to fix a couple of these errors.
This one is just a warning,
so I'll just go ahead
and delete this one.
We've checked that this is
okay and everything's fine.
In this case,
we see that there was actually an error.
Let's see, if I go and click on this,
we just had a misspelling,
so I'll just enter the I back in there.
I click on this one.
We see, actually, we need to pass .x.
So these were just a couple of warnings
that we put into the code here.
I'll go ahead and build again,
and it asks me if I want to save.
So we've already built,
and there's still one error.
In this case, this appears to be a macro
that we haven't defined.
So what I'm going to do here is to
just select this and just copy it.
And in this case,
we want to go to the inspector.
So I click open the targets group.
This is the target that defines how
to build this app called ClockView.
I hit the inspector icon, and, again,
we can just go to the build.
So I'm going to go to the build
settings here and define it.
So this is a preprocessor
macro that needs to be defined.
Now, there are a lot of settings here,
and I'm not quite sure
which one I want to set,
but I know it has something to
do with preprocessor symbols.
So I'm just going to type preprocessor.
Oh, look there, preprocessor macros.
So I can just enter the value in here.
I'm just going to paste this.
We'll define that as zero.
And then one other thing of note
is you can actually search here,
as you noticed.
And if you need to see a description,
you can just pull up a
text field down here,
and you can see more information
about the particular option.
And this, if I don't filter anything,
it just shows the most common settings
that 90% of the time you'll need to use.
Things like optimization,
preprocessor flags, things like that.
If you don't see the
setting that you want here,
odds are that it's still supported.
It's just you need to open the drawer.
So opening the drawer reveals
the different languages that
are being used in this project.
And you can actually disclose this to
go down and set particular categories.
So let's say I want to change
some options about linking.
I'll just select this.
And, of course,
the filtering works here as well.
The current setting smart group is
a special one that shows everything
that's specifically set in this target
is different from the default values.
So now to find my preprocessor macro,
I'm actually just going
to build this again.
And we see that build
succeeded this time.
And one last thing I want to note is
you can actually do single file compile.
By default, it's bound to Command K,
because that's what a lot
of people are used to.
But you can, of course,
bind that to anything you want.
You can also show the assembly code
or the preprocessed source for any of
the source files you're working on.
So with that, I will hand back to Stan.
Thanks.
Thank you, Anders.
There's going to be a much more
detailed session about it in 24 hours,
session 303, right here,
so if you want to know more.
Okay, now I've built your application,
and contrary to your expectations,
it's not quite flawless.
There are bugs.
So, the favorite of everybody, debugging.
We found out from
feedback from all of you,
from own experience and common sense,
that the debug cycle is very important,
so we try to squish it as much as we can.
We have a very efficient
debug cycle in Xcode.
First of all,
the debugger itself features a
context-sensitive data display.
With data view summaries,
we have formatters for all Carbon,
Cocoa data types,
and as well as some other data types.
And you can create your own
formatters for your custom data types.
You can do really simple ones,
which are like simple string formatters,
similar to printf.
Or if you're displaying
something really bizarre,
you can actually write bundles
that the IDE will load,
and it will display your own data types.
You can, of course,
now break on C++ exceptions.
Yes.
Another way to reduce the
turnaround time is how to get to
the debugger in the first place.
Zero link.
We are adding this feature,
which basically does away with linking,
because linking is time consuming.
Usually, most of the time,
you're adding just one file, maybe two,
but not your over 1,500 files in Finder,
right?
So you do just away with linking,
and it makes the turnaround
time go dramatically down.
It loads the object files as they are
needed as the application is launched.
So this is a very efficient way,
but not necessarily suitable for
final deployment of the application.
And then finally,
we have Fix and Continue,
which completely reduces the turnaround
time to around three seconds.
It allows you to dynamically modify your
application as it is running in place.
It's suitable mainly for logic bugs,
places where you put the wrong variable,
you're running over an array,
things like that, infinite loops.
Or my favorite, trial and error code.
I mean, for instance, I can't never get
coordinate transforms right.
I mean, even if it's something like
this is scaled by that,
or the coordinates are rotated,
I just can't get it right.
And for that, fixing continues is very,
very useful.
And for UI layout, for instance, as well.
What Fix and Continue really
excels at is when you're making
changes within functions,
changing constants,
add and modify local variables,
maybe call functions,
or even write new functions.
So you can do all of those things.
Fix and Continue is not
so suitable for changing,
or actually doesn't work with
things that have global effect,
like changing headers,
or changing globals.
Obviously,
when you modify just one file to
reference a new global variable,
all the other ones,
they don't know about it, right?
So you would have to quit and
rebuild the application for that.
Or call signatures.
It works pretty well with Objective-C,
but it does not work so
well with the other ones.
And there will be a dedicated
debugging session that will be talking
great length about Fix and Continue.
And the other debugging
kind of tools that we have
integrated with our performance.
Your application is now maybe running,
it's not crashing,
but it's still kind of slow.
And we ship a bunch of apps,
such as Sampler, Malloc Debug,
Object Alloc, and Thread Viewer.
Those are profiling applications
both for speed and for memory usage.
Because when you're leaking memory,
that's not a good user
experience as well.
Now, Xcode is integrated to a certain
degree with those applications,
the first step.
So that Xcode can call
them as your debug media,
and then those applications message back
to Xcode about selections that you make,
so that they show you actually the
code that causes all those memory
leaks or spends a lot of time.
There will be a dedicated
session about this.
This is session number 305.
And I would recommend that you go there.
Now, this time I would invite
Chris Friesen on the stage.
But that guy, he worked so hard,
he actually is homesick.
And so Anders picked up
his demo just this morning.
Welcome, Anders, again.
ANDERS FEJS: Thank you.
Unfortunately, Chris couldn't be here.
So I'll get to demo his
really cool features instead.
So I'm again going to open
the ClockView example here.
And so you've seen it being edited,
and you've seen Matt show off
some of the navigation features.
You've seen us build it,
but you actually haven't seen it run yet.
So let's do that now.
I'm going to go to one of our
pop-down toolbar buttons-- actually,
this one-- and I'm going to say
build and debug first of all.
And we'll get the clock view up here.
And it looks kind of odd.
It has a dark gray background.
So we're going to fix that.
So I'm going to minimize
this and pull this over here.
I just want to open up
the embedded editor again.
I'm going to go down to my
clock view source code here
and go through this here.
I know that there is some place in
here where the shade is being set.
And so what I'm going to do is I'm
actually going to go down and find
the fill shade equals statement.
And if I can type it right,
we'll go to it.
So there are a couple
of parts to this here.
I see that there's a
fairly dark color here.
I'm just going to go
ahead and change this.
And I'm going to save the file.
And then you notice the
check mark appears here.
This is the build system paying
attention in the background and says,
oh, I need to compile this file
now because you changed it.
So there's also a tape dispenser.
So let me just go ahead
and click on that.
And we notice that it's
compiling the clock view.
And it's going back into the app here.
And it's actually changed
the code on the fly.
So the clock continues running,
but now we have a nice white background.
But you may notice there's
something odd going on here.
I'll make it larger so you can see.
It says that this is quarter
past 4:00 in the morning.
Apparently, we have a logic bug.
So let's try to find where that might be.
Let's go ahead and search
for the string AM here.
And we see that it's right here.
So let me actually go
ahead and look at this.
And we say, ooh, greater than 12.
That's not good.
It should be less than or equal to.
So let's go ahead and change
that to less than or equal to.
I just make the clock a little bit
smaller here in the background.
And let's go ahead and save the file,
and we'll fix and continue that again.
So now it changes to PM.
So we fixed the logic error.
So as you can see,
this saves a lot of time.
If it takes a long time after
you start your app to get to the
part where the problem occurs,
you can save yourself a lot of time here.
So, so far we've just changed a constant,
we've changed some logic.
Let's call it function.
So this white background
here is kind of boring,
so I'm going to go ahead and
search for the fill shade again.
And this time, I just want to go ahead
and type something here.
Let's see, that changes over time.
So let me go ahead and
get a random value here.
So I'm calling a function in the library.
And let's see, maybe I'll compile that.
And then, whoop, we had the error again.
Okay, parse error before the parentheses.
So we'll fix that.
will do the fix again.
So now we see that every second,
it picks a new shade of gray.
So we're calling a
function in our code now.
All fix and continue.
So, um,
[Transcript missing]
And also you see here a summary of the
event for the event ref in this case.
So what I'm going to do here is
to step a couple of lines here,
and I'm going to step
down to line 205 here.
And you notice that root changed here.
It was invalid before.
We highlight the change value in red.
This indicates that it
changed in the previous step.
And we show a summary for that as well.
So, that's kind of cool.
One of the things I'm
going to do now is to,
I'm going to go down,
and there's another breakpoint here.
I'm going to go ahead and
enable this breakpoint.
I'm going to resume the debugger.
I could do this in either.
As you notice,
I go back to the text editor here,
or the debug window.
I could actually edit and see
the source code in either one.
It doesn't really matter.
I'm going to continue here,
and now it stopped at the
breakpoint I just set.
So this is where we assign
a rectangle variable.
I'm just going to go
ahead and step over this.
And first let me go down to QBounds.
It's here.
It has garbage values,
just on the stack now.
Just going to step over this.
And notice that it formats the
rectangle coordinates according to
the Carbon definition of a rectangle.
But this is just four numbers.
This is kind of confusing.
What if I wanted to edit this myself?
Well,
let's say I wanted to put in labels.
I can actually see here that
if I double click on it,
I go to the definition of this formatter.
And I can just edit it in place.
I can see the left is
equal to this value.
The top is equal to that value.
The right is equal to that value.
And then I go, actually,
that was the bottom.
and then I say R equals.
Now when I hit return,
it actually formats the string according
to the definition that I typed in.
So you can reference any arbitrary
subfields of a structure that way.
And this definition is now stored
for me per user in this project,
so you can customize it to your liking.
So these are just two of the
features that the debugger provides.
We have Fix and Continue,
which of course lets you get
back up into your app again
without having to restart it.
Great for logic errors,
changes sort of within the curly
braces of a logic of a function.
And the other really powerful feature
are the custom data formatters.
So depending on whether
you're using Carbon or Cocoa,
it automatically load in
custom data formatters.
And as you saw,
you can define your own or modify
the ones that we provided for you.
So that's all I wanted to show today.
There are more sessions on debugging
and on the build system as well.
Thanks, Stan.
Thanks, Anders.
[Transcript missing]
Now, that's just part of what it
takes to create an application.
This is just the code and the debugging.
However, there's also the other part,
that's the user-visible part,
that's user interface.
And so it is my pleasure
to introduce to you Mr.
Eric Seymour, who is the lead engineer
on Interface Builder.
And he's going to give
you an introduction to IB.
Great.
Thanks, Stan.
OK, so, so far you've been listening
and dealing with code issues
related to your projects.
And of course, it's very, very important,
but obviously a big aspect of
your projects are user interfaces.
And at Apple, we build interfaces with a
tool called Interface Builder.
And I think for those of
you who haven't seen it,
a couple of slides just to let you
know what this thing is are important.
So what is Interface Builder?
Well, Interface Builder, or IB,
is Apple's way,
or is Apple's tool for building
Aqua-compliant user interfaces.
And of course,
it supports Carbon and Cocoa,
and of course, works with Xcode.
Now, just to be clear,
Interface Builder is a graphical tool.
You drag things off of a palette,
drop them onto Windows, resize them,
set properties,
and perhaps most importantly,
establish relationships,
drag connections between things,
sometimes, and perhaps most importantly,
between things in your interface
and in your own source code.
Very, very important.
So where does Interface Builder
fit in the grand scheme of things?
Well, Xcode manages all these
resources in your project,
especially source code.
And you've been hearing over the last
couple of days all sorts of techniques
for reducing the amount of time you
need to spend in your source code,
right?
Reduce your compile loop,
reduce the amount of time it
takes to go find something,
make changes.
Well, Interface Builder perhaps
is the best example of this,
because Interface Builder does not
actually generate source code as
the artifact of your interface.
It produces archives of
your interface objects.
So it's not creating source code
that you would then have to compile
and build into your application.
It's just another
resource managed by Xcode,
compiled or built in the build process,
just simply copied into the
final product of the application.
So, what's new for Carbon with
Interface Builder?
Well, you heard that HIView
is the future of Carbon,
and Interface Builder is constantly
evolving to support that notion.
You'll notice right out of the
gate that we support several
new HIView-based objects,
HIImageView, Search, Field, ScrollView,
and more.
And also, and it's not written down here,
but we now support embedding
in custom controls.
Of course, we also support all of the new
interesting features of Panther,
including many controls
and other important things,
such as new metrics and such.
and then control properties.
This is a new feature that I like to
spend a few minutes on in Carbon support,
and what this allows us to do
is add ad hoc data values to our
controls right in a nib file.
So to do that,
I'm actually going to demo.
And I'm going to quit this
application because I need to restart.
So for this application,
I also am going to use ClockView,
standard shipped example for Carbon.
And let's just run this
thing real quickly here.
So I'm just going to run this app.
OK, ClockView, pretty straightforward,
pretty boring.
I need to add a feature to this.
So the feature that I've added
is I want an image to show up
in the background of this clock.
So as any good developer,
I have a few options of
how I'm going to do this.
Well, clearly,
I'm going to write code to do it
because this is a custom control.
But how do I make it--how do
I manifest it in the interface?
How do I trigger its
inclusion in the interface?
Well,
one way to do it is to write more code,
compile it into the app.
Another way is to write some code
and perhaps leverage fix and continue
to maybe speed up that process.
But another way is to abstract
the inclusion of the actual image,
the triggering of that
image into my nib file.
And so I'm going to do that right now.
I'll-- With the application and I'm
going to bring up Interface Builder.
And here is the nib file, so to speak,
the file that contains my
user interface for Clock View.
And this view right here represents the
custom control that is the Clock View.
And I'm going to bring up
the inspector for this.
And in the control inspector-- for
those of you who may be familiar with
the control inspector in the past,
you'll notice this new
table view at the bottom.
And this is a place that
I can associate ad hoc data
properties right to this control.
So at runtime, I can pull them out and
do something interesting.
So I'm going to add a
new property to this.
I'm going to give it a creator
code of my app and call this image,
and it's a Unicode string.
And I happen to have an image in my
project already included called Panther.
And I'll just save my nib file,
hide interface builder, and quick build.
And all that did is--
Copy the Nib file into place,
no recompiled code,
image in the background of my clock.
Now, this is important because this,
This is important because this gives
me the ability to be more than just
a viewed editor in Interface Builder.
It gives me the ability to take
attributes that I've coded into my
custom view and make them available
at a level where somebody doesn't
actually have to write code to do it.
So, for example,
if I go back into Interface Builder,
say I want to have another one of these,
I could duplicate this or
drag it off the palette,
basically just create
another custom view.
And this one I'm going to change.
I'll stick another image in there.
I'll add a new property to this,
and this one's going to be rotate.
This happens to be a float value.
Now, this editor gives us the ability to
set the actual type of the data that
I can retrieve when I get that property.
This is a Boolean,
and I'm going to call that true,
to resize my window,
and I'm going to save.
Hide Interface Builder.
Quick Compile and Run, and two objects,
slightly different data in the nib file,
but effectively,
I've repurposed that object
without writing any new code.
Okay.
So let's go back to the main screen.
All right, there's my demo.
All right, so let's talk about
Cocoa for a few moments.
So of course, in Cocoa, we're supporting,
just like with Carbon,
all the Panther controls and
sizes and interesting features.
One of those, of course,
is a brand new feature called
the Controller Layer Support.
As hopefully most of you saw yesterday,
there was a, we're supporting WebKit.
and for those of you who may be familiar
with Interface Builder of the past,
we're trying to satisfy
a long requested feature,
and that's adding data cell
support to table columns.
So you can just drag
them off your pallet,
drop them on top of your column,
and you have your cell.
And we've also revamped
the Connections Inspector.
So, to demo this,
I actually want to focus,
I only have so much time,
and I want to focus on one
very important feature,
and that's the controller layer.
Now,
Yesterday, hopefully most of you saw the
example where we built a web
browser without writing any code.
And we didn't just build a web browser.
Then after we were done
building the basics,
which is the old IB demo
of target action,
we polished it.
We made it really clean.
And hopefully you recognize
that typically to make an
application really clean,
you've got to write code.
You have to take advantage of
more than you can do with just
wiring up a few connections.
And we did this with this new
feature called the Controller Layer.
Now, I'm going to deviate from that demo.
I'm not actually going
to show that to you,
because I think it's important
to show the raw materials of what
the Controller Layer is giving
you inside Interface Builder.
So to do that, let's quit out of this,
and quit Xcode, and just go into IB.
And let's get rid of this,
because I don't need it anymore.
I'm going to create a
new application here,
and I'm going to do the staple
of Interface Builder demos,
just to start.
And that's the slider text field demo.
So I can hear the yawns.
Everybody's seen this before.
but this is an important
moment in the history of IB.
So there's my slider.
Oh, and by the way,
let's just pop a new feature here.
Let's just make that a mini slider,
just so that I can
demo yet a new feature.
And I'm going to make my
text field really large.
Another thing that's worth noting
is we've reorganized a lot of
the palettes and the inspectors
to accommodate for new features.
Hopefully you find them more streamlined,
and we appreciate feedback.
So, when I'm doing this,
what I need to do is establish
a connection between this
slider and this text field.
I'd like, when my slider moves,
I'd like the value in
my text field to change.
Okay?
So, I do that by dragging a
connection in Interface Builder,
and when I do that,
Interface Builder gives me a list of all
of the possible things that that text
field can do when it receives a message.
So, I'm going to choose "Take
Double Value From." Now,
by the way,
I just want to point out another
little feature that we've
added to Interface Builder.
We've added type-ahead support.
So, if this list were really long,
I could just start typing keys.
"P", "Take Value From",
and it'll jump around.
This is especially important,
for instance,
if you target first responder,
and you've got to scroll and find
the thing that you want to deal with.
Okay, so let's make sure that
I have that connection,
take float value from,
test our interface, right.
So now, when I'm moving my slider,
now it's a mini-control,
it's harder to hit, I change my value.
Okay, so this is kind of interesting,
right?
Many of you have seen this,
but the reality is,
that text field has a whole lot more
capability than just showing a value.
Right, and we take advantage of
that today in our interfaces.
We have colors, we have sizes,
we enable items, we disable items,
sometimes we hide them, right.
And so, what do we do?
We go to code.
Now, what I'd like to do is unwire this,
and here, we'll disconnect that.
And now I'd like to use the controller
layer to solve this problem for us.
So, to do that, I need a controller.
And so we have a new palette here,
it's the controller palette.
And I'm going to use the most
basic controller we have.
Which is an object controller.
And you can think of
this like a traffic cop,
like a,
well I was going to say traffic cop.
You can think of this like a traffic cop.
It basically is going to look at
all the pieces of our interface,
and it's going to monitor this,
when it sees a change there,
it's going to change a value there.
It's going to do all
the right things for us,
so that we don't have to write that code.
Okay.
So, I have my controller.
Now, I need to make some
bindings to this controller,
so that this actually does
something interesting.
So, I'm going to go to a brand
new inspector in interface.
And it's a very important one,
so we put it right under attributes,
it's called bindings.
And the bindings inspector is
interface builder's window into
all those other properties you
had to go to code for in the past.
Okay, so on my slider,
which I have selected now,
I could enable it or hide it,
it has max and min value,
and it also has value.
And I'm going to choose
my object controller,
which I just created,
and I'm going to bind
to a key called number.
Just an arbitrary key.
And then I'm going to
go to my text field.
Note that it has a much
longer list of things that you
can do with the text field.
It's just a more interesting widget.
And I'm going to choose
my object controller,
and I'm going to bind to the same value.
Number.
But I'm going to do something more here.
I'm going to close my value,
and I'm going to go to font size.
And I'm going to go to
my object controller,
and I'm going to bind font
size to that exact same value.
Okay?
And when I test my interface now,
not only is my value changing,
but my font size is changing as well.
Now, this is the new slider text
field for Interface Builder and
this is what I meant when this
is kind of a groundbreaking
step for Interface Builder.
Because for years,
we've been asked how come I can't
have more than one action or how come
I can't have more than one target.
And the reality is that that's the
wrong way to solve this problem.
The right way to solve this
problem is to have a controller,
one of them, be the controller for
all of these pieces.
And all you have to do to that controller
is give it its--give it the rule list,
the roster.
Okay,
here's what you need to do controller.
You need to monitor this thing and
that thing and these things over here.
And oh, by the way,
it would be really great if you could
persist this data in my data model too.
And so controllers also have implied
depending on the controller type,
the ability to persist that data
in the user defaults database
or perhaps another database.
I'm just using a raw object controller
here so it doesn't actually have
persistence but I could have used
the user defaults controller.
So that's what I wanted to show
you for Cocoa and I have lost my
clicker which must be over here.
Now, there's one more thing.
And that's compatibility checking.
So, we're on our fourth major
release of Mac OS X,
and that means that there are
all these features trickled
into releases month after month,
year after year,
and you have to support them.
And we recognize that we need
to make it easier on you to
support these features reliably.
So, what we have done in Interface
Builder is add better
compatibility checking support.
So, basically, select the format you
want your Nib to be in,
tell it what the target platform is,
the oldest target platform,
and watch for errors.
And Interface Builder will
warn you when it thinks you're
about to do something wrong.
For example,
if you are targeting Mac OS 10.1
as your oldest target platform,
perhaps you shouldn't pull a spinning
progress indicator in because
that wasn't supported on X.1,
and it just won't work.
In fact, that's a data loss one,
so you won't even be
able to save your Nib.
So that's all I have to talk about today.
Thank you.
Thank you, Eric.
That was a very interesting demo.
There will be more on that.
Summary.
Xcode gives you a very
efficient workflow.
It's fast in all respects.
It's fast at building, at debugging,
and also helps you to be fast
on your end through profiling.
We want you to use it.
Install it both on Jaguar and Panther.
In your package, there should be two CDs,
one for Panther, one for Jaguar.
99% of all features are
available on Jaguar,
all of them on Panther.
And please do send us feedback.
The product can be only as good as you
help us make it by giving us feedback.
So to start with feedback,
who to contact?
Godfrey DiGiorgi.
There are mailing lists.
There is an Xcode specific
mailing list at the very bottom.
We do read this.
Heck, our vice president has said that
he will be reading that email.
So,
[Transcript missing]
and the roadmap.
Session 303, increasing productivity,
24 hours here.
There's a special session about GCC.
There's a session about performance
tuning with the performance tools.
There's a special session
about Carbon with Xcode.
And there will be the feedback
session where you can give
us a earful of feedback.
And finally, debugging on Mac OS X after
the feedback session.